My scientific goal is develop eco-evolutionary theory for controlling the trajectory of evolution in complex ecological communities. I attack this problem by studying evolution in digital model systems. These systems are generally more complex than mathematical models (although I also work with mathematical models when appropriate), but more experimentally tractable than in vitro experiments. Thus far, much of my work has focused on the role of ecology in evolving complexity. One of the main model systems that I have used for this work is evolution-inspired machine learning algorithms. I have shown that ecological interactions are a fundamental part of how these algorithms are able to succeed. By applying an evolutionary theory lens to these algorithms, I have made multiple improvements to the current state of the art. At the same time, my study of these algorithms has lead to insights that I am currently in the process of applying back to biological evolution. A major cross-cutting theme of my research is the power of phylogenies as a lens through which to view evolution (with special emphasis on the distinctions between the reconstructed phylogenies traditionally used in biology and phylogenies that can be measured in real time).

One of the greatest challenges in working with evolutionary data in nature is that some parts of it are the result of large scale predictable patterns, and other parts are random accidents. Over the next 10 - 15 years, I believe that the combination of increased computational power and advances in wet lab experimental evolution will lead to a much more nuanced understanding of the ways in which evolution is and is not repeatable. In particular, I am excited for the potential of data science to be combined with robust evolutionary theory to identify ecological scenarios that lead to predictable evolutionary outcomes. I think that my interests and expertise can contribute to realizing the goals of the workshop because they enable me to think about evolutionary scenarios abstractly. Consequently, I can help think through which evolutionary dynamics would be sufficient to produce an observed large scale pattern. Moreover, I can directly test such hypotheses computationally. These experiments will never tell us what actually happened in the history of life on earth, but they can tell us what we might expect to observe in the future, or how to set up laboratory conditions to promote a particular type of convergent evolution to happen again. Additionally, as measuring phylogenies from biological populations in real time becomes increasingly tractable, my expertise working with the nuances of this specific type of phylogenetic data will allow me to help identify useful ways to leverage this form of data.